# Ferent

A Clojure library  to calculate dependency metrics
measurements on the model of [JDepend](https://github.com/clarkware/jdepend).

For each project, we calculate dependencies based on the count
of service account in other projects that are granted a role
in this project. The idea is that the other project "knows about"
this project and is impacted if this project changes.

Though there can be dependencies not reflected in service accounts,
it is reasonable to use service accounts to track dependencies
if we assume that
   * internal integrations are authenticated
   (i.e., internal websites are not like  public websites that can be
   left open for unauthenticated use);
   * inter-service authentication is done with service accounts (which is the best practice).

## Output

### Example

```clojure

{"project-a"    {:arrow-in 2, :arrow-out 10, :instability 0.83},
 ;...
 :project-count 44,
 :cycles        (["project-a" "project-b" "project-c"]
                 ["project-b" "project-c"  ]) 

 }
```

### Explanation
* For each project
  * `:arrow-out`  is the number of dependencies (called "efferent" in JDepend).
  * `:arrow-in` is the number of dependees (called "afferent" in JDepend).
  * `:instability` is the count of dependees as a fraction of all links for this project 
  (dependencies plus dependees). The idea is that a project 
  that depends on lots of others is at risk of being impacted by a change 
  and so  should be non-infrastructural -- it should be at the application-level.
* `:project-count`  is the number of projects in this organization
that were analyzed.
* `:cycles` shows cycles of dependency links among the projects.
  * In the example above 
    * `project-a` depends on `project-b`
    which depends on `project-c` which depends again on `project-a`, resulting
    in a cycle between the three
    * and in addition, `project-c` depends back on `project-b`, resulting
    in a cycle between the two.
  * Avoid cycles! A cycle  effectively links everything in one 
    unit, so if one change, all are potentially impacted.
* Links to unknown projects -- e.g., outside the organization -- 
are ignored. This is because your system architecture generally 
lives inside an organization, and any links outside it are considered to be
outside integrations.

## The name

Ferent is short for "afferent" and "efferent".  I use  other terminology here, but in brief:
* Efferent links (Laten _ex_ and _ferens_ "leading out"), called  `:arrow-out`, show the dependencies,
  the projects that this project depends on. A change in those projects might break this one.
* Afferent links (Laten _ad_ and _ferens_ "leading in"), called  `:arrow-in` in the code, show  the dependees,
  the projects that depend on a given project. A change in this project might break those.


## Usage
### Permissions
Use Organization Administrator or any role that will allow you to
list project, to see what IAM roles each projects grants, and what service accounts
are in each one.

### Prerequisites
* [Install Clojure](https://clojure.org/guides/install_clojure)
* [Install Leiningen](https://leiningen.org/)
* On Mac, `brew install   leiningen` should do it
* [Install gcloud cli](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install) and initialize.

### Running it
* The typical and minimal usage is, `ORG_ID=<ORG_ID> lein run`, where you substitute
the organization ID for `<ORG_ID>`. 
* See more options below.
   
### Environment variables
* There are no command-line arguments.
  * Set env variables:
    * `ORG_ID`
      * For example `999999999999`
      * This is mandatory.
      * Ferent will retrieve a list of all projects in this organization to which
      you have access (filtering  using the `QUERY_FILTER`),
       and track dependencies between them. 
    * `QUERY_FILTER`
      * For example

          `NOT displayName=generated-by-app-* AND NOT projectId=sys-*`

      * This is optional. 
      * Set it to make the querying faster. If you have a lot of  
      projects autogenerated by some application (comparable to `sys-` which is autogenerated for 
      Google Workspace AppScript and appears in the default filter), a correct filter can radically speed up the process.
      (in one test: from 8046 to 151 seconds)
      * See some (rather misformatted) docs on the  query syntax [here](https://cloud.google.com/workflows/docs/reference/googleapis/cloudresourcemanager/v3/projects/search).
      * The default is `NOT projectId=sys-*`, which excludes the many projects
    often generated by Google Workspace AppScript.
  * `QUERY_PAGE_SIZE`
    * For example `950`.
    * This is optional and usually you will not set it.
    * The default value is 1000.
  * `PROJECTS_FILE`
    * The relative or absolute path to a file with a list of projects in EDN format.
    * This is optional, and generally you will not use it 
    (since you probably don't have a list or projects, and Ferent
    can retrieve that for you).
    * If used, then the list of projects will not be queried out of GCP, 
   though the list of permissions and service accounts for each project will be. 
    
# Implementation note
Google's APIs for listing all projects in an organization are
slow and require you to call the API too many times.
The code here does the listing as quickly as possible. 
It is in Clojure, but it uses Java APIs and you can 
translate it easily to Java, Kotlin, etc.

Key steps
* Query all accessible projects using [CloudResourceManager][1]
`projects()`
   * The query uses paging.
   * Use `setQuery` to accelerate the query with a filter by 
   filtering out, for example, 
   the hundreds of `sys-` projects often generated by AppScript.

* From the results:
  * Accept those that are the child of the desired org.
  * Filter out those that are the child of another org.
    * For those that are the child of a folder, do this 
    (concurrently, for speed): Use 
    `gcloud projects get-ancestors $PROJECT_ID` 
    to find the organization.
    * I don't see a way to do that in Java, and so I call the CLI.)
    Accept those in your org;  filter out those not in your org
 
   
  

  [1]: https://cloud.google.com/java/docs/reference/google-cloud-resourcemanager/latest/com.google.cloud.resourcemanager.v3
the 

## License

See `LICENSE.md`